Get here than we thought we would.
Yes believe it or not.
I have a friend that lives in New Castle, Virginia and apparently it's been
raining for two days, they've been cleared up. At least raining it's not snowing
huh. David do you have a level? Yeah, pretty good. Looking good? Yep. Okay, well
let's get the road on the show then. The tape is running now, so whatever you
say can be held against you now. Okay, I want to start out with a statement.
Your science fiction certainly has a novel approach, and on the back of Space
Time Donuts it says that the pansians say that Rucker has busted free of all the
linearities and restrictions of modern science fiction. So what I want to do
first of all is explore your science-fiction roots a bit. When did you get
interested in science-fiction, that sort of thing? And did your writing, how did
it appear? Well, when I was growing up, I read quite a bit of science-fiction. I
lived in Louisville, I grew up in Louisville. And my mother used to get me
Heinlein's Juvenile Novels, like Revolt of 2100, or Rolling Stone. the puppet
masters. Those books. I really enjoyed those books. And then I used to go to the
library they didn't have a great deal of science fiction but they had a you know
like death stories of 1942 or something and read that stuff and then when I got
out of high school I started reading it less. The book
made me look like And then in high school, I was still reading that. In college,
I didn't read it so much. I read some Vonnegut. I always thought Sirens of Titan
was a really good science fiction book. And then I really went away from it for
a number of years because I was more interested in being a beatnik, you know,
like Jack Kerouac, William Burroughs, all that kind of stuff. And then at some
point I wanted to start writing science fiction again. I wanted to start writing
anything. And well why don't you ask me a question? How do I go on to the
following bio how? When you did decide to write science fiction and the end
result was our first exposure to your white light and it did bust free quote
unquote of the science fiction restrictions, Did you write to bust free of
restrictions, or did you just write what came and it just happened to bust free
of restrictions? Well, I always wanted to be an avant-garde writer. And, like,
science fiction is a place where it's easy to be. You can write whatever you
want to. Actually, the first book I wrote was Space Time Donut. And that I
wrote, I think it was in 70, I think it's 77. when I wrote it. A Pramp 76. It's
under a mountain. And that I wrote right after seeing The Rolling Stones play
live in Buffalo. And I just, I just like really wanted to do something. And I
wrote this. I wrote it during the summer when I was teaching in upstate New
York. And there, what I wanted to do with that book was make a strong anarchist
statement about the way I film in that society. It was, you know, like basically
sort of the late 60s, really book, even though it was really in the mid-70s. And
then with White Light, the way I came to write White Light was kind of weird. I
wrote Space Time Donuts and I couldn't sell that anywhere. And finally Unearthed
magazine agreed to serialize it. and uh... they serialized the first two parts
of it and then went out of business and at that point i lost my job where i was
teaching in upstate ne york uh... they wouldn't give me ten years of good maths
and it's different but then i got a grant to go do mathematics in germany and
got a grant from the german government went to heidelberg went there for i had a
two year well a two year grant there and uh it's from the fun humboldt
foundation that's why some of my books are dedicated to humboldt and uh i got
over there and to my delight i discovered that the person in charge of my
research really didn't care about mathematics either and so i just started
writing science fiction and uh i spent about three months trying to solve this
problem the continuum problem That, you know, I knew a lot about it. It's a very
difficult problem. Then I said, well, I'm just going to write a novel about it.
And then I came to write White Light that way. Which, it's about different
levels of affinity.
I've already seen, you know, like, I do want to bust through linearities because
I like Patty Smith, you know, I like the rolling stones. And I just like to kind
of tear down the wall and break through to something that's truer. While we have
you in Germany, did the experiences there, or some of the experiences, were
those written into your story, Schrodinger's Cat? Yeah, absolutely. That's just
about what it was like in Heidelberg. And since then, I've written a novel
called The Sex Sphere, and that's based totally on my experiences in Europe. At
this point, I'm still looking for a publisher for that.
But I like to use it. I generally, whatever settings I use, it's almost
like some place I've been. I also wrote software when I was in Germany. The
first year I was there, I wrote white light. The second year I wrote software.
And the software, I was trying something different. Because in a way, both Space
Time Donuts and White Light are autobiographical. They're both essentially the
main, the hero that's me. and then I wanted to see if I could do a book where I
wasn't in it. And so, The Software is like a young guy who's sort of, you know,
based on a guy that I used to hang around with, a guy younger than me. And the
old guy in there is, to an extent, based on my father. And, so I did that. And
then the sex here, that's back to basically being about me. My main like overall
plan is over my life, I'll do like Jack Kerouac, write a whole lot of novels
better, basically my life story. I'm sort of transcendental by an autobiography.
Okay, the protagonist in White Light, Felix Raymond. Yeah. It struck me that he
was basically happiest when he was teaching one of his advanced courses and when
he was playing with his little girl. Otherwise, he didn't seem all that happy.
Is that, I know, I read that you have three children. Uh-huh. Is that
autobiographical? I do have the three children, and I do. I am happy when I'm
leaving. I communicate, you know, better, perhaps, with the children than the
grown-ups. You know, with children you can just, you know, wrap on and do
anything, and they're not going to see why. One thing that I noticed that in
common between the protagonist in White Light and then the hero in Schrodinger's
Cat, they both at one time or another were stuck at, oh, shall we say, out-of
-the-way colleges. Oh yeah, yeah, that was definitely my experience when I was
at this place in upstate New York. The town called Genesea is near Rochester.
and it was really, you know, like, it was nowhere to end, you know, and again,
I'm stuck in nowhere until, it's like my fate, you know, it's like if you can't
deal with something, it just keeps coming back with you. It comes back to you
even if you can't deal with it. Now I'm here in Lynchburg, I guess I'll probably
try to read a book about Lynchburg, too, at some point. Yeah, I have some
questions on that at the end. the thing about, another thing about white light
that struck me, I I saw it when it came out and I purposely did not buy it
because the packaging led me to believe that it wasn't something I would be
interested in then I read a review It was a very tautery packaging I was going
to ask you what you thought of it Well, when I saw it I was surprised it just,
it amused me I thought it was funny well the one thing I got them to put on the
cover was do you want to see God oh I can't tell them to put that on the back
and I've met people since then that are really into like dream stuff and astral
travel and like they've read it and very seriously and they're just like don't
understand why the book is sort of not so serious as it should be and when I was
Jim Bain he was the editor of Ace at that time and he bought it I was happy that
he bought it. You know he gave me good money. I think it was his marketing
decision. He probably thought well we can sell more copies if we package it as
you know something for sort of superstitious foolish people instead of packaging
it as avant-garde literature. I imagine he's probably right.
This one. I mean I take a long view I think I mean these books are gonna be out
a lot of those that are out there and soon or later they will find their
audience. This book had higher mathematics in it than any science fiction book
I've ever read. When I think about it, I don't recall that many science fiction
stories that are based on math. Most of them are Möbius Strips. Some take off on
that. Yeah, they did have a lot of math. I wanted them to mention that on the
cover. I said to Bain, well why don't we say this is... the it's like you know
the flat land you know that talk about the fourth dimension by edwin abbott's
flatland it was written like in the 1800s so i want him to say well you know
this is as interesting about mathematics as flatland it's really we do that and
the book is going straight down the toilet so i don't know this the last two
books ace has tried to do a more a somewhat more high-toned presentation.
I like that, though, that, I mean, to have your books presented in this low-brow
way, then you can, like, reach the masses, which is really, I mean, like a lot
of people read science fiction, it doesn't have to be presented as, like, a New
Yorker story. Although, really, you know, I'm trying to get to the same piece.
Do you plan to concentrate on the mathematics as much in subsequent works? Oh,
not necessarily. Well, for a book, I need an idea, you know, an interesting
idea, something that interests me to explore. And Infinity was what I was
interested in exploring in White Light. And Space Time Donuts, I was interested
in a certain idea about the structure of space that I had. and in software i was
interested in something to do with girdle's therum and artificial intelligence
uh in the sex sphere i was interested in something called hilbert's space that's
infinite dimensional space and i don't know right now i'm just gonna write a
book that's pretty well it's about inertia i mean it's about a physics idea so i
wouldn't want to like be categorized just as somebody writes about man because
i'm also interested in physics as well so but i mean definitely i do have like a
lot of training a lot of interest in science the first book i published was
actually a mathematics book it was called geometry relativity the fourth
dimension and that came out in 77th from dover and that It was basically a
popular presentation, things like this would be worth mentioning. I also have
another mathematics book coming out this spring, in April. It's called Infinity
and the Mind. Basically that's going to give you most of the theory that lies
behind White Moans. And these books don't count on tenure, on your publishing
record, huh? Well, everywhere, I mean I just got fired here as well. Every place
I get a job they throw me out because they see me as a dangerous person with
dangerous ideas.
It's annoying, but then I think, how cool can I be if these stupid straight
blind people would keep me on. So after this summer, I'm going to be... I have a
teaching job now, here in Lynchburg, but I'm going to leave it. And after this
summer I'll be just writing. I think I'm going to have enough books and things
coming out so I can live off the right. Why do you think you're perceived as
dangerous? Well, because, well, I take important things seriously and I don't
take unimportant things seriously. You know, I'm interested in the absolute and
I like to freak people out, I guess. I mean, I don't go out of my way to do it.
I just, I'm just, you know, like the world's worst politician. Do you think you
would have less trouble let's say if you were in a big league school, a faculty
on a big league school, Berkeley or say one of the big ten schools, Ivy League
where maybe they are a little more tolerant? It's possible but the thing is I
can't get in the door there. Are you interested in math enough, that's a poor
way to put it, okay? I used to go to math conferences it just bore, it's very
boring to listen to this stuff. registered in but only on my own terms that
stuff live my whole life on my own at this point I'm gonna be able to quit and
just write and I don't think I would want to go back are you gonna stay in
Lynchburg already
we know we've made some friends here you know it's not the ideal place I'd
rather be a little bit closer to a big city. You know like... But right now with
the three kids I know I can't go moving every two years. So I'm going to be here
another year.
It did strike me as ironic when I read that you lived in Lynchburg because
that's I believe the headquarters of CBN the Christian Broadcasting Network with
all their worldwide facilities and all.
Does that actually have quite an influence in the town itself?
Yeah, it's a pretty
big town. And generally speaking, the people that are supporters of Jerry All
will live on the other side of town from where I live. I can't say that I've
met, I've lived here two years and I haven't met a single person who doesn't
think that he's, you know, I mean, I haven't met a single person who's a
follower of his. I did go to the church once to check it out. I mean, as a
science fiction writer, I definitely need to go check it out. And it was, it's
like, you know, it's like a TV studio. I mean, it's just... Donald said one
prayer in the whole service, and you know what they prayed for? They prayed for
$5 million.
But it really, they haven't bothered me. They haven't affected me. I mean,
there's a lot of people here just... You know... In a sense, he's not anywhere.
He's on the airwaves. He's not really anywhere.
Okay back to spacetime donuts. That was interesting by the way... you have a lot
of... you have a zippy vocabulary and I think that really adds a lot to your
characters. There's a couple of words I have to know the etymology and that was
the loach's and the zz74 I can't help but think there's something hidden behind
those. Okay. Why? I'll tell you what a loach is. It's actually, we used to have
a fish tank. It was a kind of fish you can get called a loach. It's a real weird
fish, because it doesn't have any fins, and it's long. It just wriggles, and
it's a really sick thing. Also there's the fact that in high school, my wife,
she grew up in D.C., and they used to call the police the roach, like a cop car
was the roach coach. So then I thought loach. So that was the loach. I didn't
know I'd just say the pig, you know, so I said the loneg. And ZZ-74, this was
Nostarian Genesilla. There's a kid I used to, he's a student, but I used to hang
around him a lot. Diamond Joe. And he was telling me once about this drug. I
could never really tell if he was putting me on or not. But it was a drug called
ZZ-74 that you would take. And it was just like being deaf. And so I don't know,
just the name of the drug, it seemed so neat. When he told me this, it was 1974.
And so I kind of just hung on to that name. I don't know if there ever really
was such a drug or not. Of course, in the book, there isn't, because it's, you
know, it's like the name. OK,
as you remarked, this book is very 60-ish. and the adjective that came to my
mind when I read it was Phil Dickian, as though Philip K. Dick wrote it. So I
have to ask, did he have any influence on you? Have you read his works? Well,
yeah, I mean, I like Phil Dick a lot. You know, generally, if I get hold of
always books, I read them. So, I don't know, there's some things about him that
I guess plots don't usually wrap up too well. like I like a good tight plot you
know I mean he always he starts shifting the reality so much and it becomes it's
only locally interesting there's not enough global structure to me in his books
no I mean he's definitely one of my favorite writers but I think I try to get a
local structure kind of like Dick but what I think I can do that he's not always
He says,
I woke up and had gotten high with all these English science fiction people and
had placed White Light with the publishers at Virgin. This guy, Maxim
Jakubowski, he was a record company in England, Virgin Records, and they were
going to start publishing science fiction. And so I met the guy, Maxim
Jakubowski, and they got him to take White Light. So they published it actually
in England before they published it in the U.S. but just like lying around in
this cheap room in a rooming house and reading Scanner Darkly was really one of
the best times I've ever had
I would think your books would go over well in England they seem to be a little
more receptive to the avant-garde type plots and so forth Well, you know really
the sales have been better in the US Well, Virgin, they made a mistake. They
went to the other extreme from Ace in the way they packaged it. They put it in a
real small type and said it was the cult novel of the 80s, stuff like that. And
they didn't really show as many of these.
Software seems to me to be the most linear, quote unquote, of your three science
fiction novels. Yeah. And you were exploring robot sentience. I've never seen
robot sentience explore before. It's generally robot civil rights, something
like that. But again, this was a first. Or just what it would be like to be a
robot. Yeah, do they have souls, that sort of thing. Yeah. Yeah, I think it's
really neat to think about robots. The great thing is when they change the guys
over to the robot and you just notice. But first, I mean there's this man, Cobb
Anderson, they take his software out and program it to a machine. And initially
he doesn't notice the difference.
There's a big collection by Douglas Hofstadter and Daniel Dennett called The
Lion's Eye. It came out this fall, from basic books, and they have a whole lot
of essays about these kinds of questions. and they had a section of software in
there. Which section did they have? Well, I think they had the first two
chapters introducing Cobb Anderson, and then they jumped up to where Ralph
Numbers is on the moon and where he gets stabbed. And then, you know, Innocence
dies.
I would think that a lot of what Hofstadter does would be interesting to you. Oh
yeah. Yeah, I've talked to him a couple of times. I really respect what he's
done. And I hope my book Infinity and the Mind can do his will as good as you're
both. What, a mere Pulitzer Prize? Yeah, well, I'll settle for $200 to $1. I'm
not a surprise. That's even better. Yeah. All of your writing seems to imply to
me that the world has a character of the Everett Wheelers-Graham universe. Yeah,
I mean, that's something I've always been really into. Because I read that stuff
a long time ago. And that there are many universes.
I don't know. So this one universe, it does seem to exist in a very definite,
stubborn way. To me, that's one of the really confusing things. That's one of
the problems that I can't understand. Why it is that if there are many
universes, why does it feel so much like we're just in one of them? That's
actually an aspect of the problem. It's an ancient problem called the one-many
problem. In a way, any problem I've ever been interested in Lloyd then is the
one-many problem. How can the world be both one thing and many things?
With your training in math and physics, and the obvious reading that you do,
you've got to have a gut feeling about what is reality, that sort of thing. Do
you think that Everett Wheeler-Graham model is what describes reality? It's fun
to write about, Uh huh. But uh... Oh I don't believe this much as I used to
though. In fact Wheeler himself doesn't believe it very much anymore. He's
written some papers since then. I don't really think that there are all those
other universes really spinning themselves in.
I don't know. I mean what I think the world is. It varies from time to time.
I really couldn't tell you what I think it is.
Well, there's a lot of time in the summer. You get a lot of vacations in the
summer. less generally well I'm not really I mean before when I was in
Heidelberg for those two years I basically had no obligations at all just no
string to 10 and there I just rode 9-4 everyday
or well 10-3 whatever so there it was pretty easy And now, here has been working
in Lynchburg, at Randolph-Macon, Randolph-Macon Women's College. It's all girls
and I teach all girls.
Well, in the summer I write, and I write in the afternoons. Like, I really like
to write. I'd rather write that anything else. I mean, within reason. It's
basically, it's just something, some free time that I would rather write. So I
find time for it. That's the thing. If you really want to write more than
anything, then you can always find time for it. And you don't even have to have,
like, a whole long time to do it. You don't even have to feel like writing.
If you have an hour, you'll... If you write a page, well, that's a page that you
got to write.
Do you have girls in your classes that asked what higher-order calculus has to
do with teaching great school kids how to learn? I remember that scene from
White Light. Well, that was more at the other place I taught at Geneseo because
there were a lot of people who were being trained to be elementary school
teachers, that's not so much of a factor here. Yeah, I used to be ass-bid, and I
don't know. Well, they would say, well, why should we learn this? But, you know,
why should you learn anything? I mean, if you get, like, so materialistic, that
the only reason to learn anything is to produce machines that make consumer
goods, you know, what about art? What about literature? What about mathematics?
What about pure science? What about everything? it's just stupid. I mean, why do
we do anything? We're going to die anyway. It's just, you know, have some fun.
Your books are liberally peppered with references to rock music, some more than
others, with the obvious Zappa and the Stones, and then I noticed some oblique
references to Country Joe and the Stones and the Fugs. Obviously, rock music
means a great deal to you. It must have influenced you oh yeah yeah absolutely
it's uh it's you know it just always meant so much to me but like when i see the
stones i've been to see them three or four times i didn't get to see them this
way but it's like it's like the only time i've ever been in a crowd and there
was somebody standing in the front of the crowd with a microphone that i didn't
basically want to shoot you know when they're somebody that I really felt like
following you know and you know I mean I just really they're just saying what's
true and what's good and nobody could ever stop them and it's just so great you
know like there's all the all the establishment and trying to keep everybody
down and trying to deny that anybody has an individual consciousness or is
really aware and having thoughts and just you know wham you know like just play
it as loud as you want to. And everybody digs it, and they can't stop. I think
it's, I don't know, rock music, it's like, it's like the greatest thing. You
said that you had seen the Stones and Buffalo, and that inspired you to write
what became space time donuts, because you wanted to write an anarchic novel.
Does the music, is it kind of a subliminal message or a right hemisphere message
or what that gets to you that makes you want to write like that? Well I don't
know. I mean, sometimes I'm writing well, I think it's like good guitar playing.
Where there's, you have like little surprises in each sentence, you know, choice
of words that are surprising. And like tasty, tasty riffs.
Do you feel any pressure being the great, great, great, how many greats is it,
grandson of Hegel? Well, I think I've done my part, you know, for the Absolute.
I really like to read his stuff, and it's pretty hard to read. I've read books
about him, but the actual books are very hard to read. But it's my impression
that I have somewhat the same ideas about the Absolute being the ultimate thing
the white light. I would say, you know, like later, if people look back, they'll
say, well, gee, that's pretty much what Hegel would have wanted to write if he
was a man of fiction.
Oh,
not at all, no. I never read either one of those books they put on the cover. I
couldn't believe that. On the cover of white light, he mentioned like Jonathan
Livingston Seagull and Life After Long that was just unbelievable it was so late
no I mean white light that's like in the 60s when if you took like a whole lot
of LSD everything would get all white you know and then God would talk to you
and that was like an experience usually you would only get it once because you'd
look out for it in other times. That's very white, Mike. One other influence I
wanted to ask you about, because it's mentioned in the book, is it mentions
you'd talked to Gerdl several times. Was that quite an experience for you, to
talk to somebody of that stature? Oh, yeah. I mean, that was... For me, he was
like the ultimate guru that I ever met in my life. I just, you know, I was
fortunate, you know, I got to see The Master at that formative stage in my life.
Again, that tends to be a one-time thing. I mean, at this point, he's dead, and,
you know, when I'm an old man, maybe somebody will come see me or something.
But, I don't expect to meet anybody like that again. yeah, he was just well, I
wrote an article about him on Science 82 Science magazine. I guess they'll put it
out and, um the thing about Gerdo when I would talk to him I'd make up a list of
questions I wanted to ask him about all this stuff about math and philosophy and
physics and so on and like, he'd have been sitting alone in Princeton there like
for 30 years and like 30 years ago he had proved the heaviest things that
anybody had ever done in mathematics and he'd been like 30 years past that he
was like thinking all the time and anything I'd ask him you know like he'd
already been all the way down the road and he would just laugh I mean a lot of
when I would talk to him he'd say a few words and then he'd start laughing and
I'd start laughing with him and like as we would laugh I would feel like we were
communicating it was it sounds kind of stupid when I say it like this, but it
was, you know, like a real feeling of telepathy. Like, you know, anything I
would say you would totally understand, which is really unquestionably the
greatest person I've ever met.
What are your plans now? You've apparently finished Sexfear. Any concrete ideas
on what you're going to do next? Well, yeah, this year, I'm going to need money.
So I'm probably going to try to write a couple of novels this year. I wrote a
story called The Dershow, and I sent it to Analon. And then I talked to Stan
Schmidt, and he said, well, it doesn't really have a good ending. And then I
wrote more, and I kind of doubled the length, and now I think, well, I'll just
make it into a novel. And this is not going to be—this will be more like sort of
a software type thing. where I'm not trying to go all out and break the back of
the absolute to bare my soul. Justino writes a meditating science fiction.
And so I may end up doing some stuff. I'd like to have, like, giant leeches
invading Lynchburg and stuff like that. So I'll probably do that. And I could
probably finish that by itself. And also I'm working on a book called All the
Visions. And all the visions. I want to sort of write down all my memories or
all the visions that I've had. Write them down. And perhaps it depends whether I
would make it science fiction or not, I'm not sure. In any case, change it so
it's not really true. But depending, sex here, I have some hope I can sell it
mainstream. If I could sell it mainstream, then I'd make all the visions
mainstream. If I can, then I'll make all of this in science fiction. And after
that, I'd like to do a sequel to the software, probably call it Hardware, about
whether robots start building the bodies of people as well, because to saddle
some places with ... and
maybe a science book. Your first book really hit with a bang, because in the second, third books,
all they do is talk about the first one.
Uh-huh. Would it bother you if that first one
was what you were known for, and anything else you wrote after that, people
would always compare it to that or say, well, gee, he never was quite as
original or whatever, or do you worry about things like that? Well, sure, yeah.
I agree with that. Well, I see myself as writing sort of two streams of books. I
kind of alternate. I mean, I think the sex sphere is like, that's, you know,
it's a book like White Light. It's real big, real heavy. And to software, that
was, you know, I'm taking a little more easy on that. And now I'm going to do, I
just did a heavy book, now I'm going to take it easy, and I'm going to do
Inertia. They'll do all the visions, they'll be real heavy. So my feeling is to
alternate back and forth.
Which one I'll be known for, I don't know. You know each person takes his own
favor. If one books, people like it enough to look at the others. I think it's
at for themselves.
Okay, that's it. We appreciate the chance to get to talk to you. Okay, well it's
a good fun film though. Yeah, I read the second two because I like the first
one, and I like them a lot, and I plan to read them. Lots of luck and all that
good stuff. I look forward to what's coming out. You say the article on Girdle
is going to be in Science 82? Yeah, that would be out this summer. Okay, good. I
get it, and so I'll have to take a look at that. Yeah, I'll have an anthology of
stories out from Ace next winter. These are your stories. Yeah. We call the 57th
Franz Kafka.
Okay. Okay. It's been all right. I enjoyed it. It's, I guess, part of the
resonance. I guess I'm a couple of years younger than you are, and so, it's, you
know, kind of went through the same times. I can remember some of those times.
And it's quite enjoyable to read it. Everybody hasn't been co-opted. Yeah,
that's good to hear. Okay, thanks again, and we'll talk to you later then. Okay,
bye-bye.